

The Apple logo hangs inside the glass entrance to the Apple Store on 5th Avenue in New York City. Photograph: Mike Segar/Online News

Ireland wants to play fair and “play to win” in relation to international competition for inward investment, the Minister for Finance, Michael Noonan , said in his budget speech.

The measure being proposed by Mr Noonan will address the controversy over the Irish Apple subsidiary, which was incorporated in the late 1970s, and will have little or no impact on more recently established Irish subsidiaries of global technology companies.Earlier this year US Democrat, Senator Carl Levin , said the Irish Apple subsidiary had achieved the “holy grail” of tax avoidance by not being tax resident anywhere. He said the company had avoided huge amounts in tax as a result. The Irish government disputed evidence heard in Washington that Apple had negotiated a “special deal” with the Irish government.The head of tax with EY Ireland, Kevin McLoughlin, said it was his understanding that the measure proposed by Mr Noonan would be very targetted. Until the proposed bill was published next week, it would be hard to know what options affected companies would have, he said.Under current Irish tax law, Irish registered companies that are managed and controlled from other jurisdictions, are not tax resident here. Such companies, resident here but controlled and managed from offshore locations such as Bermuda and the Cayman Islands , form part of the international tax structures of major multinationals such as Google and Microsoft . Although they may pay no corporation tax, they are not “stateless” in terms of tax residency and are outside the scope of the measures proposed by Mr Noonan. A spokesman for Mr Noonan’s department confirmed this was the case.







The latter is a policy whereby a multinational’s accounts would give more information as to its activities in various countries, even if the profits from those activities flowed to a headquarters company based in a country such as Ireland. There has been much debate over recent years about developing countries not receiving any corporation tax receipts from the activities of multinationals in their jurisdictions.

Return to results