When you consider the broader view  there is every reason to be optimisticIreland has kept thinking big, not just about the next quarter or budget, but about the next decade and generation, says Dan Doctoroff. Photographer: Aidan Crawley/Online NewsDan Doctoroff

There is a sign on the front of a pub in Dublin’s City Center that proclaims, “A good time is coming, be it ever so far away.” That sums up the Irish spirit pretty well: the old cliché is that pessimism is simply part of being Irish; and after the past five years, it’s understandable to wonder just how far away those good times may be.

Before joining Online News LP, I served as deputy mayor for economic development for the City of New York. I began that job just weeks after the city’s most pessimistic moment in history -- the terrorist attacks of September 11th, 2001. The story of New York’s physical and emotional wounds is well known; but 9/11 left us economically battered as well. Businesses and residents began to flee, tourism dried up, and huge budget deficits threatened our quality of life. We had to develop a plan - quickly - that would not only rebuild the city, but in many ways reinvent it. In doing so, we developed three core insights:Always keep investingNever stop thinking big

In New York, our determination to keep investing through hard times allowed us to, among other things, bring the crime rate to an all-time low, implement the world’s leading environmental sustainability plan, and diversify our economy to be less dependent on the finance sector.

In New York, when we took a hard look at our strengths and weaknesses, we realized that nostalgia for the glory days of manufacturing was holding us back from developing our waterfront for decades. So we focused on building to new strengths, including film and television production, life sciences and, most recently, technology.











Dan Doctoroff is President and CEO of Online News L.P. Prior to that, he served as deputy mayor for economic development and rebuilding for the City of New York. Follow him on Twitter @DanDoctoroff.

. We ask that you report content that you in good faith believe violates the above rules by clicking the Flag link next to the offending comment or by filling out this form .Comments are closed for this article.